In this video, we will demonstrate how to identify accessibility issues for a sample webpage.
First, let's demonstrate how to manually find the accessibility issues documented on the practice triage sheet
(answer key).
Issue 1: Lack of heading 1 for Explorers needed
Visually, this content appears to be a heading. However, by inspecting the HTML we see the content is actually a paragraph element styled
like a heading 1. This makes it more difficult for blind screen reader users who rely on these headings to navigate and fails the WCAG
criterion 2.4.10 Section Headings. The content should be coded with semantic h1 element tags
so that it is recognized as a heading by assistive technology like screen readers. Similar to Issue 1,
Issue 2: Lack of heading 2 for contact details - refers to the "Sign up for a one way mission to Mars" content in
the middle of the page. By inspecting the associated HTML, we see the content is a paragraph element styled like a heading 2.
This content should instead be coded with semantic h2 element tags. Next,
let's look at the "Your contact details" section of the page. The asterisk * symbols next to the name and phone number
fields seem to indicate the fields are required. If we leave the fields blank and submit the form,
we see that we indeed get an error. This makes it more difficult for blind screen reader users who may not get any readout for the asterisk symbols
and other types of symbols, failing WCAG criterion 1.3.1 Info and Relationships.
Now we identify Issue 3: Required form fields. Having an asterisk is not enough to communicate that a field is required.
This really could be considered a general bug! Inspecting the HTML we see the input tag should have a required attribute for the associated input tags.
Issue 4: Lack of association between error and form field. The ambiguous error message,
"There is a problem processing the form." is not helpful - especially for those using assistive technology. Blind screen reader
users may not understand from this text that there was an error on the form! This fails WCAG criterion 3.3.1 Error Identification.
The error message text should instead be more specific and associated with each required input field.
For example, "Error - First name is required." next to the first name field would be a better choice.
Issue 5: Use of color as the sole means of indicating meaning.
This is always problematic, especially for errors. For users with visual impairments like color blindness,
distinguishing error messages based on red or green color alone blocks these users from perceiving the errors, failing
WCAG 1.4.1 Use of Color. Therefore, adding meaningful text in addition to the usage of color is highly recommended.
For example, within Workday you'll often see accessible error messages like this.
Issue 6: Lack of status announcement for error - is a little more difficult to find manually.
For example on a Mac, you can use the voiceover built in feature to hear what announcements are made.
If we clear the page and submit the contact details without any data, you'll notice there is no announcement made when the error message appears on the page.
(Voiceover announcements begin  - Welcome to voiceover. Now in Codepen Tesco Bank a poor example of a form google chrome window. Link -
click here. Edit text. Blank edit text. Blank edit text. Blank. To get missing image descriptions open the context menu. Button.
You are currently on a button inside of web content. To click this button, press control option space. To exit this web area,
press control option shift up arrow. - Voiceover announcements end) This is a huge barrier for blind screen reader users who may not perceive that an error occurred on the page and
fails WCAG 4.1.3 Status Messages. To fix this, appropriate ARIA attributes need to be added to
the HTML.
Finally, the color contrast of the red error text against the red background color of the error message itself is not high enough to ensure that people
with lower perception of color can see the error message.
This fails WCAG criterion 1.4.3 Contrast (minimum). And, brings us to Issue 7: Insufficient
color contrast for text.
The styling of the error message on the page needs to meet the 4.5:1 color contrast WCAG requirement for text.
Using the Canvas Kit tokens error color, for example Cinnamon 500 on a white background, would be a better choice.
The last two issues on the practice triage answer key are specific issues related to assistive technology and maybe difficult to identify manually for
those unfamiliar with screen reader usage. Issue 8: Unable to locate region bypass blocks - is based on the structure of the DOM.
For screen reader users who rely on these regions to navigate the webpage, it is critical that such semantic regions are present for consistent navigation
across Workday products and services. This is also a failure of WCAG criterion 2.4.1 Bypass Blocks.
To fix this type of issue, the DOM should be written using main, h1, footer, and other semantic HTML elements.
Not generic divs! Issue 9: Lack of association between labels and fields is also problematic.
This webpage is not using any label for attributes and has no ARIA label attributes provided. It is essential to provide an HTML
label tag with a "for" attribute for screen reader users to perceive what information to enter into fields.
A lack of labels or association for labels is considered a failure of WCAG criterion
3.3.2 Labels or Instructions. WHEW! That was a lot of information and took a lot of manual work to identify.
Wouldn't it be great if there were automation tools to help you quickly identify some of these accessibility issues?
Well, good news. There are!
Now let's use the axe Expert automation tool to identify accessibility issues. I've already added the axe Expert extension to my Chrome browser.
Open the extension tool. Then select analyze.
You can see the issue count here. There are 11 issues identified.
Depending on the testing scope you set on your automation tool, you may see a different number of issues.
But on this full page scan you'll get the same number of issues. The key thing here is to look at the summary of critical and major issues and address
them. Using the automated tool can save you valuable time and identify common problems. Some WCAG issues and recommendations for fixes
are also built into the tool. It is important to remember though that automation can't find every kind of accessibility issue.
It is well known that automation tools at best find 25-50% of possible accessibility issues with possible false
positives.
The accessibility of products and services is based on the human ability of assistive technology users to use and access experiences - something
which automation can only provide limited information on.
Make it a habit to inspect webpages to find and address accessibility issues. Together,
your efforts will help ensure Workday products are accessible for all. Thanks for watching!